Coronary Artery Disease : 
Coronary artery disease, also called CAD, develops when your coronary arteries 
become narrowed, damaged or diseased.  Your coronary arteries supply your heart 
with blood, oxygen and nutrients.  
Deposits or plaques that contain 
cholesterol can build up in your arteries, 
causing coronary artery disease.  When 
plaques build up, they narrow your 
arteries, causing your heart to get less 
blood .  Because of this, coronary 
artery disease is called “hardening of the 
arteries” or atherosclerosis.
Coronary artery disease often builds up 
over time, sometimes over many years.  
Symptoms can go unnoticed.  As time 
passes, symptoms become noticeable or 
grow worse.  However, once you know 
you have it, you can make changes in your 
life that can help you have a better life.  
You can eat better, exercise, and take 
medications prescribed by your health 
care provider.  If you use tobacco, you 
can quit.  All these changes can help you.  
Also, cardiac rehabilitation becomes a 
very important part of a healthy life.  It 
helps you to know what you can do safely 
and how and when you can increase your 
activity and exercise. 
How the Heart Works :
Blood flow 
All muscles need oxygen and blood 
supply to work well, including the 
heart.  Your heart is a muscle about 
the size of your fist that pumps blood 
to all parts of the body.  The right part 
of the heart receives blood that has 
delivered oxygen and nutrients to the 
body .The right part 
of the heart pumps this blood to the 
lungs where it picks up more oxygen 
before passing into the left part of 
the heart.  The left part of the heart 
pumps the blood to the rest of the 
body to deliver oxygen and nutrients . This cycle is repeated 
with each heartbeat.
Coronary arteries
Three main coronary arteries carry 
blood to the heart muscle.  The right 
coronary artery supplies blood to the 
bottom and a portion of the back of 
the heart.  The left coronary artery has 
two branches, the circumflex coronary 
artery and the left anterior descending 
artery.  These two branches supply 
blood to the top, front and left sides, 
and the area of the back of the heart.  
Coronary artery disease can cause the following to happen: 
• Chest pain or angina.  When coronary arteries narrow, your heart may not get 
enough blood when it needs it the most — particularly during physical activity. 
This can cause chest pain or angina and shortness of breath
 Symptoms 
that may show your heart muscle is not getting enough oxygen include
Pressure, tightness, pain, squeezing or aching feelings in the chest or arms.– Feeling of fullness like “gas” or heartburn, nausea, vomiting, or indigestion.– Aching, numbness or pain that begins in your chest and spreads to the jaw, neck, 
throat, shoulders, arms, and the back, usually between your shoulder blades.– Sharp, burning or cramp-like pain.– Shortness of breath.– Dizziness.– Fast heartbeat or palpitations.– Sweating or perspiration.– Abdominal pain or heartburn.– Clammy skin.– Feeling dizzy or lightheaded.
Unusual or unexplained tiredness or fatigue
Nitroglycerin 
Your health care provider may prescribe a medication called nitroglycerin to help treat 
angina.  Nitroglycerin helps angina because it gets more blood and oxygen to your heart.
Taking nitroglycerin
If you use tablets, sit down and then put one under your tongue or 
between your lip and gum.  Let the tablet dissolve all the way.  Do no 
swallow or chew the tablet.  
Take only one tablet.  Sit for 5 minutes.  If you still have angina after 5 
minutes have gone by, get emergency help.  Call 911 or your designated 
emergency number right away.  While you are waiting for help to arrive, 
take a second tablet.  Sit for 5 minutes.  If your angina still has not gone 
away, repeat a third time.
If you use a spray, sit down and then hold the sprayer just in front of your 
open mouth.  Spray once under your tongue or inside your cheek.  Close 
your mouth and wait a few seconds before you swallow.
Only spray once.   Sit for 5 minutes.  If you still have angina after 5 
minutes have gone by, get emergency help.  Call 911 or your designated 
emergency number right away.  While you are waiting for help to arrive, 
take a second spray.  Sit for 5 minutes.  If your angina still has not gone 
away, repeat a third time.
Pretreat.  Sometimes angina may be prevented if you take nitroglycerin 
before an activity that has caused angina in the past such as climbing 
stairs or before a stressful situation.  However, talk with your health care 
provider before doing this.  
Do not pre-treat without talking without your health care provider first
Heart Attack
A heart attack, also called a myocardial infarction or MI, can happen suddenly and 
without warning.  If plaques in your artery become inflamed and burst and a blood clot 
forms, complete blockage of your heart artery may trigger a heart attack.  The symptoms 
you have can be the very same as those for chest pain or angina (See “Coronary Heart 
Disease: What Can Happen” ).  However, symptoms can be more severe, without letting 
up.  Chest pain symptoms usually go away with rest or medications.  New or increasing 
chest pain may be a warning that you may suffer a heart attack.  Talk to your health care 
provider if your chest pain seems to be getting worse, coming on with less activity or 
happening while you are resting.
Many people confuse a heart attack with sudden cardiac arrest.  However, a heart 
attack is different from sudden cardiac arrest.  Cardiac arrest happens when your heart 
stops beating in a coordinated way and causes blood to stop flowing to the rest of your 
body.  This usually causes death unless it is treated early.   
Heart damage after heart attack
The coronary artery is a blood vessel that feeds blood to a part of the heart muscle.  
When blood flow to your heart is interrupted, a part of your heart can be damaged or 
destroyed.
Heart attack symptoms
Heart attack symptoms can last more than a few minutes.  Common symptoms 
include:
• Pressure or feeling of fullness or a squeezing pain in the center of your chest that 
lasts for more than a few minutes. 
• Pain extends beyond your chest to your shoulder, arm, back, or even to your teeth 
and jaw.
• Increasing episodes of chest pain. 
• Prolonged pain in the upper abdomen. 
• Shortness of breath.
• Sweating.
• Impending sense of doom. 
• Fainting. 
• Nausea and vomiting. 
Additional, or different, heart attack symptoms in women may include: 
• Abdominal pain or heartburn. 
• Clammy skin.
• Lightheadedness or dizziness. 
• Unusual or unexplained fatigue.
Heart attack symptoms are different for everyone 
Some people experience no symptoms of heart attack.  This is called a “silent 
myocardial infarction.”  Not all people who have heart attacks experience the same 
symptoms or experience them to the same degree.  Still, the more symptoms you have, 
the greater the chance you may be having a heart attack. 
A heart attack can happen anytime.  Some heart attacks strike suddenly, but many 
people who experience a heart attack have warning symptoms hours, days or weeks in 
advance.  The earliest warning of a heart attack may be recurrent chest pain or angina 
triggered by activity and relieved by rest.  Angina is caused by a temporary decrease in 
blood flow to the heart. 
Tests after a heart attack
After a heart attack, you will have a hospital stay.  During this time, many tests are done.  
You are also likely to have follow-up tests after leaving the hospital.  These tests help to 
decide on the right treatment for you.  Tests you may have include the following.
Chest X-ray.  A chest X-ray shows outlines of your heart, lungs and other structures in 
your chest.  A chest X-ray gives information, such as the size and shape of your heart and 
the condition of your lungs. 
Blood tests.  Blood tests give information about levels of many parts of the blood, such as 
blood cells, cholesterol levels, amount of heart damage or other chemicals in your blood. 
Electrocardiogram or ECG.  The ECG shows heart rate and rhythm.  It gives information 
about the electrical conducting system of the heart muscle.  After your heart attack, the 
ECG may show where your heart damage took place and will indicate any ongoing 
damage or other changes that may need further testing or treatment. 
Echocardiogram.  An echocardiogram uses harmless sound waves to show the different 
areas of you heart.  It shows areas of possible damage and can be used to determine your 
heart function or ejection fraction and any other associated heart problems.
Exercise stress tests.  Exercise stress tests evaluate your heart rate and blood pressure 
during exercise.  They can show any irregular heart rhythm you have during exercise 
and can determine if part of the heart may not be receiving enough blood supply.  They 
can also help determine a safe level of exercise for you.  
Cardiac catheterization or coronary angiogram.  Cardiac catheterization or coronary 
angiography uses a long slender tube, a catheter that goes through the groin or wrist to 
the coronary arteries in your heart.  This procedure shows any blockages you may have 
and is used by your health care provider to decide what treatment might be best for you.    
Nuclear testing.  Nuclear testing shows the heart function and amount of heart muscle 
damage.  It also shows the blood flow and pumping ability of the heart.
Treatments after a heart attack
Your health care provider may suggest treatments to help prevent another heart 
attack.  Your health care team discusses how to manage your recovery.  Treatment 
choices include:
• Managing risk factors. See ”Risk factors you can change.”
• Cardiac rehabilitation.  See “Treatments that may help you.”
• Medications.  See “Medications.”
• A stent or angioplasty.  See “Percutaneous coronary intervention.”
• Surgery.  See “Cardiac surgery.”
